Hi there.
This is Diamond Uluru.
And welcome back.
So we said that we are going to refactor our project in order to use a database.
So the first thing that we need to do is we need to design our database before we can actually create
our database and create all the tables in the database and also populate them with the data.
So whenever you're working on a project, once you have the requirements in place, the business requirements
in place, one of the first things that you would do is to design your database so that you would do
before even creating the database with the necessary tables and database.
Designing is a very important step and it would be done by somebody who is experienced.
And if it is not done properly, then there can be a lot of issues like inconsistent data.
And so you would want to design your database in a proper way.
And one of the things in a relational database is to reduce redundancy of the data.
And for that, we use something called us normalization.
So normalization is a process which would address redundancy, and it has a bunch of rules.
And you would have to use those rules in order to design your database so that it has as minimal redundancy
of data as possible.
So in this particular lecture, we will look at these normalization rules, and so we are going to learn
about database designing.
And in the next lecture we will look at the actual database design for our project.
And after that we will actually go ahead and create our database and also all the tables within the
database.
So these are the different normalization rules.
So they are called as normal forms.
So you have one NF two NF, three NF, B, C and F four and F five and six and F one and F is called
as the first normal form.
And it was introduced by Edgar Card.
And we discuss we mentioned about Edgar Card in the introductory lecture, and this was introduced in
1970 and after that two NF and three NF were introduced in 1971.
And in 1974, Card has collaborated with Baez and together they came up with the boys card normal form.
Now in practice, mostly you would expect the design to be in either the three and a half form or be
CnF.
So if it isn't big enough, most likely there will not be any tendency in in the different tables.
Sometimes there can be some redundancy, but mostly you wouldn't see any, any, any redundancy.
Now, if a particular table is in CnF, then it also means that it is in three and F and it is also
into an F and it's also in one and F, and if a table is in three enough, then it means that it is
in two and F and also in one and F and if it is in two NF, it means that it is also in one NF.
So in this particular lecture we are going to look at one and F two and F three and F and and F and
four and F and file and F on six and F are most likely for more complicated databases.
And we are not going to discuss that in future.
If I feel it is necessary, I might add a lecture on them, but at least for now, I don't want to discuss
about those other normal forms.
So this is what we have now.
Let's go ahead and look at our the data that we already have for our project.
So you might recall this particular file.
So this is the book file.
The text file.
The data for book.
And we know that our project is about bookmarking books, web links and also movies.
And this was the data that we had for book.
Now, imagine that all of this data is inside a table called Book.
And here we have the different columns.
The first one is the ID, second is the title of the book.
Third is publication date for is the publisher.
First one is author.
Sixth is genre.
The seventh is rating.
An eighth is whether it is kid friendly or not.
Now here we can see that one of these rules has multiple authors and they are separated and in relational
database.
You wouldn't you wouldn't want your data to be in this format.
It's not in normalized format.
So we need to start normalizing it.
And for that, we will use the normal the normal forms which we have, which we have just discussed.
So we are going to discuss about them and we are going to reduce the redundancy.
Now, here, it's very difficult to search for a particular row if the data is like this.
It's not very easy to search for the data.
So this is not recommended.
So you do not want to store your data in this way.
So here I have this file called as normalization and using this file and I'm going to explain about
the different normal forms.
Now, I'm not we're not going to discuss it at a very in-depth level.
It's if you go into the details, it will take a lot of time.
So we are but we are going to cover it at an appropriate level.
And you should be able to understand this normal forms.
And any good database designer will know about this normalized forms.
Sometimes some developers do not understand this, and many times it might be fine, but sometimes they
might.
Because of a lack of understanding of this.
They might design databases that are not well designed, but we will definitely look at this and a lot
of people actually get confused between three and F on BC and F and they are confused with that.
But hopefully this will clear that up.
Hopefully you will.
You'll be able to understand these different normal forms in a nice way.
So the thing is, we do not want the data to be in a normalized form.
So what we need to do here is we have these different values here.
So the first normal form requires that each cell in the table has only one value.
So it shouldn't have such commerce operator list of values and it and it calls it as atomic values.
So it requires each attribute value to be atomic.
So, so that's the term that they use for first normal form.
So in order to do that, we need to split this particular row into multiple rows and each row would
have only one author.
So that's exactly what we have done here.
So this had first design patterns, book has multiple authors and we have split it into these different
rows and we can see that now each of the cells here have only one value.
Now the disadvantage with this is we have redundancy because we can see that the rest of the data for
that particular book has been repeated for all these four rows, right?
So because of that, we have increased storage and we have something called update, delete and insertion
anomalies.
Now for instance, update anomaly is that if you want to change something, you would have to change
in all the different rows.
If you want to change this to head first design, you would have to change that in all other rows.
And if you do not do it in one of them, then you would end up with inconsistent data.
So that's the update anomaly now deletion is that now let's say if we delete this particular row here
and if there is only one book by this author, then if we are going to delete this, then we lost information
about the author too along with the book.
So we no longer know.
We no longer have this author information at all within our database.
So that's a deletion anomaly, an insertion anomaly.
Is that now let's say if we want to insert information only about this particular author or some author,
but we do not have any book information that the author has written, then it might not be possible
to insert that kind of a data into our database, that is, to insert only the author information,
because this particular table might require us to always add the book title also.
So if we have that kind of a constraint, then it will not be possible to add it.
So that's the insertion anomaly.
So in order to insert that, we need to insert the book title also now.
So but this is in first normal form, but it has these some issues here.
Now, before refining this particular schema, furthermore, we need to look understand a few things.
One is we have here something called as candidate keys.
So earlier in the introductory lecture, we mentioned about primary key and this would be the primary
key here.
But in general, there can be multiple keys in a table.
For example, here it is a primary key.
So let's just call it as a key.
But there can be other keys also.
For instance, here, title publication, date and publisher name.
Together, these three columns can also be another key, and in that case, we call it as a candidate
key.
Whenever we have more than one key, we call it as a candidate keys.
And these three columns would uniquely identify a row.
So you cannot have another row with valid in 1854.
And while there publications, you cannot have that.
So in that sense, it is called as a unique key.
Similarly, there is also another candidate key, which is title publication, date and the author.
So together the rows and those columns were also uniquely would also be unique.
Now in the table, if you have such kinds of different kinds of keys, then we call them as candidate
keys or simply keys.
But one of them we will assign as a primary key.
And normally developers prefer to have a primary key, such as this one, which is an integer, because
it will help with performance.
So especially if you have tables like this.
So this is a book table and let's say there are other related tables also.
And if for a given query, if you have to combine these different tables in order to get the required
data, then you would combine those tables based on some common fields.
So we earlier we in the introductory lecture I mentioned about foreign key.
So foreign key would be referencing a primary key in a table.
Let's say there is another table which references this primary key.
So in that kind of a in that kind of a scenario, when we are joining those tables using these common
attributes like the foreign key, referencing the the ID in this.
So the ID field would be common there, the ID in this field and the foreign key and the other table.
So you would use that, that common field in order to extract the data.
And we will see that kind of a query later on when we are fetching some data from the database.
It's called a select query.
So for that, it would be much, much better if if the primary key is an is an integer.
So that's why a lot of developers prefer it to be an integer rather than use something like this as
a primary key.
Basically every table will have an primary key, so you can have it that way.
And so in that case, we call the primary key as a surrogate primary key.
And surrogate primary keys cannot have any null values.
So just keep that in mind.
So you cannot have a null value and null value is it just means that you do not have any data for that
particular cell.
So just like the null value and in the Java programming language, but here the unique keys can have
some null values too.
So you can have title like Walden and 1854 can be null and then you can have some publisher.
In that case, the uniqueness does not matter in the sense some other record can have valid in null
and also while there publication.
So when there is a null, then that unique constraint is relaxed.
So that's one thing.
So unique keys can have both of these are unique keys and they can have null values.
So just keep that in mind.
Now let's look at two NF.
For two and f to understand to an F, let's just assume that there is another column called Publisher
Address.
Here we have public publisher name.
So every publisher also has an address.
So which means that the address is dependent on the publisher name.
Publisher address is dependent on publisher name.
And that kind of a dependency is is just shown in this way.
It's this way using like this with a dash and an arrow.
So, and it's called as a functional dependency.
FD It's called as a functional dependency.
What it means is if the publisher name, same publisher name appears multiple times, then the publisher
address also would repeat.
So there's the thing.
Now, if we have this kind of a this kind of a dependency, functional dependency, and if this left
side attribute, which can also be more than one attribute.
Now, if this is a proper subset of some key, now here we have the different keys.
And if this particular attribute on the left side, if it is a proper subset of some key, then this
particular relation would violate second normal form.
For instance, here publisher name is part of.
Here, this particular key.
So what is going to happen is we are going to have some redundant data.
So, for instance, here.
O'Reilly.
O'Reilly media is in some has some address, so it's going to repeat that multiple times.
All right.
So that's redundant data.
So the thing is, so if you have a functional dependency and if the left side attribute is a proper
subset of some key, then you have, then the table is not in second normal form.
And the way we resolve it is so we need to decompose this table into multiple tables so we can have
two different tables, publisher and book.
So earlier we had only book.
Now we will have publisher table and move that publisher name and the address into this new table called
Publisher.
So you have name and address here, so and so they have been moved from the book table.
And this publisher also has a primary key ID and that ID will be referenced here in the book table.
So in the book table, we no longer have the name and address.
We just have the publisher underscore ID and this publisher underscore ID would be the foreign key and
it would reference this ID and the publisher table.
And with this, we have many to one relationship, many to one relationship in the sense here, many
records, many, many publisher records would more than one publish publisher record would correspond
to exactly one publisher within this table.
What it means, in other words, is a single publisher can publish many books and they call it as many
to one relationship.
So if you look at from this side, from book to publisher, it would be many to one from the other way.
It would be one to many.
So that's one thing.
Now, similarly, let's also assume that we have authors biography.
Then we once again, we have this a similar situation, we call it as a partial dependency.
So we have the author here.
Author name.
And we are saying that there is some biography associated with the author.
So the dependency is author name and the author bio.
So the author bio is dependent on the author name, an author name as a proper subset of this particular
candidate.
KEY And so we once again have some redundant data, and so we need to split that table.
Furthermore, and for that we are introducing two more tables called author and book underscore author.
So Author Table will have the name and bio just like the publisher and the book underscore.
Author is what will capture the relationship between book and author.
But here we have we have a different kind of relationship called many to Many, because a particular
book can be written by multiple authors and a single author can also write multiple books.
So in order to capture that kind of a relationship, it's called as a many to many relationship, we
need to introduce a linking table, a relationship table, and that is what we have here and here.
The book Underscore ID is a foreign reference to the ID in the book table and author underscore ID is
a foreign reference to the ID in this field.
If it's confusing, I think it will be it will get clear later on.
But this example is similar to the book and user example we have seen in the introductory lecture where
we had user and book and we also had another table called book underscore user or user underscore book,
which was capturing the relationship about our users bookmarking some book and they are also we have
the many to many relationship, so many to many.
We are going to introduce a relationship table in this way and that is also something called as 1 to
1 relationship and that you would normally have.
Okay.
For one instance where you would have that as for instance, here you have the user table.
Now let's assume that there are 50 other columns in this table, and so you have a lot of data, but
then the username and password is also stored here.
So every time that you want to verify some username and password, you want to validate the username
and password.
You would have to look into this huge table.
So instead of doing that, what you can do is you can split this user table into two tables.
And one of the tables you will just have the email and the password, and in the other table you will
have the rest of the data.
Similarly, sometimes certain data, some data can be of very large data type.
Like if you are storing an image, then it it occupies a lot of space and you don't want to access that
particular table.
So in which case, you can store the image in a separate table, but you will still maintain the identical
primary key.
So both tables will have same primary keys.
So there it will be a 1 to 1 mapping between between the two tables, between the rows in the two tables.
So you would have this row and in another table you would also have a similar table with fewer number
of columns.
So that's the 1 to 1 relationship.
Now let's go back to normalization.
So that's the second normal form.
And if it is in second normal form, it's also in first normal form.
So you're basically reducing the redundancy by splitting the table into multiple smaller tables.
Now the next one is big enough.
Actually, the next one is three enough, but to understand it easily, we can first look at CnF.
So now to understand we see boys code normal form.
Let's assume we have a new column called Batch.
Let's say the book table has a new column called Batch and the batch can be something like this, like
a bestseller or all time top hundred.
So the book, if a book has this thing, this particular batch, it means that it's a bestseller.
So now let's assume that it depends on rating.
So the functional dependency is rating followed by the batch.
So batch is dependent on rating, but in BC enough for a table to be in CnF, there can be only such
kind of dependencies.
You will have the key on the left side and on the right side you will have non prime attribute.
Non prime attribute is just an attribute which is not part of any of the keys.
So we know that we have these keys here, the candidate keys.
If the right side attribute effort is not part of any of that, those keys, then you have, then you
have a non prime attribute on this side.
And so we in CnF all of the functional dependencies should be like this, but in this case rating is
not is not a key.
And because of that the book relation book table is not would violate CnF because there is going to
be some redundant data.
So you have rating and you have batch.
So whenever the same rating repeats, the batch is also going to repeat.
Okay.
So that's the thing.
So for this, the decomposition would be quite similar to the earlier case.
So where you would create a new table, let's call it, as rating and you would have rating underscore
badge.
And within the book table, we will use a rating underscore ID which will reference this particular
ID.
Okay.
Now, with that, the relationship as the relation book relation is redundant, free and typically any
relations, if all your relations are in BCD form, then it is very unlikely to have any redundancies.
So that's the thing.
You would try to be in this kind of a normal form.
Now three and F if a relation is an F, it is also in three NF onto NF on one NF, but if it is, there
can be a chance when a relationship is not in BNF, but the relation is in three NF and in three NF
there can be some redundancy.
Now if we for the same functional dependency badge badges a non prime attribute.
Now if we assume that this badge is part of some other key, now let's say there is a key called title
publication here and badge, which means that badge is part of this key.
And that case, this relation would satisfy three NF So it's not in NF, but it is in three NF.
So it is going to violate NF.
In that case, there can be some redundancy because the rating and badges there and as the rating is
going to repeat, badge is also going to repeat.
Sometimes we might have to compromise with this and we need to allow this.
So it may not be in big enough, but we may have to stick with three NF and sometimes we may even have
to stick with lower normal forms which are lower than three NF and that also we do it for we do it for
performance reasons.
So sometimes we may have, we may allow certain redundancy for performance reasons.
So normalization, while it is good where it reduces redundancy in certain cases for certain queries,
it might be slow to produce the results for the user to see.
And so if there if those such kind of queries are often, then the system response time will be slow.
So in order to avoid that, we programmers are developers will generally allow some redundancy also.
But again, it depends on the project.
But normally you would try to aim to achieve something like a redundant free data.
But if that's not possible, then this is then you might accommodate some redundancy.
So essentially that's what we have, that's normalization.
And you would always look for your tables to be in certain normalized form, and that normal form would
tell the degree of redundancy within the relation.
So essentially that's what it is.
And you want to address the redundancies.
We generally we decompose the tables into smaller tables so that those smaller tables would not violate
the normal form that we are looking at.
And so the redundancy will not be there.
But practically you would your relationship relations would either be in CnF, F, R, three and F,
so that's what you would try to you would aim to achieve.
So that's about it.
So that's I think that's a nice introduction to database designing.
And next we will look at a database design for our project itself.
And if you're interested, you can read more about it by either Googling or mostly you can purchase
the book that I have specified in their introductory lecture, and they have more in-depth description
about these forms.
And normally many developers are also kind of confused between BCC and F and three and F, but hopefully
you got some fair idea about them.
That's it.
Thank you and happy coding and see you in the next lecture.